# Week 8: Learning Activity (Independent Session to Work on Project) 


### Summary Of Goals: 

1. Understand how ADA-1 overexpression in HA-CART cells changes gene extression at a transcript level using RNA seq data, previously published in the paper: https://www-sciencedirect-com.ezproxy2.library.drexel.edu/science/article/pii/S1535610824000084?via%3Dihub#sec4 

2. The groups that will use are listed below: 

| Group # | Gene Edit         | Description                             |
|---------|-------------------|-----------------------------------------|
| Group 1 | HA-CART           | Control CART                           |
| Group 2 | ADAOE-CART        | CART with ADA-1 Overexpression         |


3. Create a reference genome using the human genome + CAR plasmid + ADA plasmid so that I can identify changes in transcript levels beyond those two edits (Will helping with this). 

4. Create a gff file for the reference genome that identitifes where the transcripts start and stop. (Will helping with this). 

5. Locate the following files and share with Will in order to make unique reference genome: 

    a. CAR Plasmid Fasta file 
       
    b. ADA Plasmid Fasta file 
    
    c. genbank files for CAR/ADA plasmids
 

 
 6. Once these files are found send to Will. 
 
 
 ## Steps Used to Make reference Genome
 
 
### 1. Find the RNA Seq Data from Paper: "Bulk RNAseq data from AAVS1KO, CD39KO, CD73KO, A2aR KO, ADA-OE HA-CAR T cells".
     https://www-ncbi-nlm-nih-gov.ezproxy2.library.drexel.edu/geo/query/acc.cgi?acc=GSE250442
     
### 2. Locate the following files and share with Will in order to make unique reference genome: 

####    CAR Plasmid Fasta file

1. Klys paper that I am using cited that HA-CART were generated based on previously described in this paper:  https://www-nature-com.ezproxy2.library.drexel.edu/articles/s41586-019-1805-z
   
   **Notes from thier Methods in "c-Jun overexpression in CAR T cells induces exhaustion resistance"**

   - **Viral vector construction:** MSGV retroviral vectors encoding the following CARs were previously described: CD19–28z, CD19-BBz, GD2–28z, GD2-BBz, Her2-BBz, and CD22-BBz. To create the HA-28z CAR, a point mutation was introduced into the 14G2a scFv of the GD2–28z CAR plasmid to create the E101K mutation. The “4/2NQ” mutations47 were introduced into the CH2CH3 domains of the IgG1 spacer region to diminish Fc receptor recognition for in vivo use of HA-28z CAR T cells.
       -  Cited Paper from the mutations that were introduced: https://aacrjournals.org/cancerimmunolres/article/3/2/125/467742/The-Nonsignaling-Extracellular-Spacer-Domain-of



    - **Viral vector production:** Retroviral supernatant was produced in the 293GP packaging cell line as previously described6. Briefly, 70% confluent 293GP 20cm plates were co-transfected with 20ug MSGV vector plasmid and 10ug RD114 envelope plasmid DNA using Lipofectamine 2000. Media was replaced at 24 and 48 hours post transfection. The 48HR and 72HR viral supernatants were harvested, centrifuged to remove cell debris, and frozen at −80C for future use. Third generation, self-inactivating lentiviral supernatant was produced in the 293T packaging cell line as previously described. Briefly, 70% confluent 293T 20cm plates were co-transfected with 18ug pELNS vector plasmid, and 18ug pRSV-Rev, 18ug pMDLg/pRRE (Gag/Pol) and 7ug pMD2.G (VSVG envelope) packaging plasmid DNA using Lipofectamine 2000. Media was replaced at 24 hours post transfection. The 24HR and 48HR viral supernatants were harvested, combined, and concentrated by ultracentrifugation at 28,000 RPM for 2.5hr. Concentrated lentiviral stocks were frozen at −80C for future use.

    - **Retroviral transduction:** Non-tissue culture treated 12-well plates were coated overnight at 4C with 1mL Retronectin (Takara) at 25ug/mL in PBS. Plates were washed with PBS and blocked with 2% BSA for 15min. Thawed retroviral supernatant was added at ~1mL per well and centrifuged for 2 hours at 32C at 3200 RPM before the addition of cells.

    - **CRISPR KO:** CRISPR/Cas9 gene knockout was performed by transient Cas9/gRNA (RNP) complex electroporation using the P3 Primary Cell 4D-Nucleofector X Kit S (Lonza). On day 4 of culture, HA-28z CAR T cells were counted, pelleted, and resuspended in P3 Buffer at 1.5–2×106 cells per 20uL reaction. 3.3ug Alt-R .Sp. Cas9 protein (IDT) and 40pmol chemically modified synthetic sgRNA (Synthego) (2:1 molar ratio gRNA:Cas9) per reaction was pre-complexed for 10min at room temperature. 20uL cell suspension was mixed with RNP and electroporated using the EO-115 protocol in 16-well cuvette strips. Cells were recovered at 37C for 30min in 200uL T cell media then expanded as described above. KO efficiency was determined using TIDE and/or immunoblot. Control HA-28z CAR T cells were electroporated with a gRNA targeting the safe-harbor locus AAVS1. The following gRNA target sequences were utilized: AAVS1- GGGGCCACTAGGGACAGGAT, JUNB-ACTCCTGAAACCGAGCCTGG, BATF-TCACTGCTGTCGGAGCTGTG, BATF3- CGTCCTGCAGAGGAGCGTCG, and IRF4-CGGAGAGTTCGGCATGAGCG.
   
        
       
    b. ADA Plasmid Fasta file 
    
    c. genbank files for CAR/ADA plasmids