## This is the new README file where I describe my OMICS project

### 1. Introduction

This goal of this project is to analyze publicly available ATAC-seq datasets
from models of HIV-1 latency for regions of chromatin accessibility across the
integrated provirus. This information will be used to determine sites accessible
for CRISPR gRNA targeting.

### 2. Literature Review

Several studies have used ATAC-seq to survey chromatin accessibility in the
context of HIV-1 infection. One such study utilized ATAC-seq with Hi-C,
ChIP-seq, and RNA-seq in  J-Lat 10.6 and J-Lat 8.4 cells to profile chromatin
and transcriptional changes upstream and downstream of the provirus upon HIV-1
activation (Shah et al., 2022). In this class, I will use the ATAC-seq data from
J-Lat 10.6 cells generated by Shah et al. (2022) to assess relative chromatin
accessibility at the positions of our lab's gRNA targets. This will support my
thesis research by allowing me to use available ATAC-seq datasets to better
understand whether chromatin accessibility might impact delivery and efficiency
of our gRNAs.

### 3. Methodology

The data used in this project was generated by Shah et al. (2022).

Bioproject: PRJNA764194

SRA: SRP337615

Run ID		| Run Info
----------------|-------------------------------------------------
SRR15931104	| J-Lat 8.4-ATAC_TNF_rep1; Homo sapiens; ATAC-seq
SRR15931102	| J-Lat 8.4-ATAC_rep1; Homo sapiens; ATAC-seq
SRR15931099	| J-Lat 10.6-ATAC_TNF_rep1; Homo sapiens; ATAC-seq
SRR15931096	| J-Lat 10.6-ATAC_rep1; Homo sapiens; ATAC-seq

Only J-Lat 10.6 datasets will be used for this project. Please see
~/data-projects/chelsea/atacseq/ATACseq_data.updated.csv for input details.

This data was analyzed using the nf-core/atacseq pipeline (Patel et al., 2023).

I made changes to nextflow atacseq pipeline as detailed in the makefile:
```bash
~/repos/OMICs/projects/ceg327/makefile
```
I had to re-install nextflow in my repo, as I couldn't run it from the makefile. 

Next, I had to run the test the pipeline to confirm whether everything is working:
```bash
nextflow run nf-core/atacseq -profile test,conda --outdir ./results
```
Kept getting an error message related to the conda channel configuration, so I
reordered the channels by editing the .condarc file located in the home
directory:
```bash
conda config --show channels
conda config --remove channels defaults
conda config --remove channels bioconda
conda config --remove channels conda-forge
```
When adding the channels back individually did not work, I reorderd the channels manually in the .condarc file:
```bash
cd ~/
ls -la
# locate .condarc
vim .condarc
cd repos/OMICS/projects/ceg327/
conda config --show channels
```
I also added '--macs_gsize 2700000000', to eliminate errors related to the kmers-utilization.

Then, I re-ran the nextflow test:
```bash
nextflow run nf-core/atacseq -profile test,conda --outdir ./results --macs_gsize 2700000000  -resume
```

Once the test run completed, we moved all of my work to Yawning-Angel as running
the pipeline required more memory than what was available from Mistake-Not. Please see the
makefile for all additions made for running the pipeline.

### 4. Results

Figure 1. Chromatin accessibility of the integrated HIV-1 provirus in J-Lat 10.6
cells during latency and reactivation. The nf-core/atacseq pipeline was used to
compile publicly available ATAC-seq data from Shah et al. (2022) with a custom
J-Lat 10.6 reference genome and visualized alongside our gRNA target sequences
using IGV (Robinson et al., 2011). J-Lat 10.6 cells were
stimulated with TNF-α for 24 hr prior to FACS. Cells were sorted on GFP, and
then 50,000 cells were processed for ATAC-seq following the OMNI-ATAC protocol.
ATAC-seq libraries were then sequenced by Illumina Hiseq2500 with a 50 bp
paired-end format (Shah et al., 2022).

Figure 2. gRNA targets within the 5’ LTR are differentially accessible during
latency and reactivation. Visualization of ATAC-seq data compiled with 5’ LTR
annotations and gRNA target sequences was performed using IGV after processing
by the nf-core/atacseq pipeline (Patel et al., 2023). 

###  5. Discussion

The results show that stimulation with TNF-a results in greater chromatin
accessibility across the integrated HIV-1 provirus in J-Lat 10.6 cells, as
compared to an unstimulated state. Interestingly, we see some difference in
acessibility at the 5' LTR in the region targeted by our SMRT-1 gRNA, while the
target regions for SMRT-9, SMRT-4, and NFkB-1 gRNAs show little to no difference
in acessibility. These changes will need to be quantified to determine
significance.

### 6. Conclusion

Here, we show increased chromatin accessibility of the HIV-1 provirus under
stimulation with TNF-a in J-Lat 10.6 cells. Future work will evaluate the
fold-change in openness at regions targeted by our SMRT gRNAs.

### 7. References 

Harshil Patel, Jose Espinosa-Carrasco, Björn Langer, Phil Ewels, nf-core bot,
Maxime U Garcia, Robert Syme, Alexander Peltzer, Adam Talbot, Drew Behrens,
Gisela Gabernet, Mingda Jin, Matthias Hörtenhuber, Jonatan Gonzalez Rodriguez,
Kevin Menden, & Ömer An. (2023). nf-core/atacseq: [2.1.2] - 2022-08-07 (2.1.2).
Zenodo. https://doi.org/10.5281/zenodo.8222875

Shah R, Gallardo CM, Jung YH, Clock B, Dixon JR, McFadden WM, et al. Activation
of HIV-1 proviruses increases downstream chromatin accessibility. iScience.
2022;25(12):105490. Epub 20221108. doi: 10.1016/j.isci.2022.105490. 

Robinson, J., Thorvaldsdóttir, H., Winckler, W. et al. Integrative genomics
viewer. Nat Biotechnol 29, 24–26 (2011). https://doi.org/10.1038/nbt.1754
